
The Natura 2000 network (ZSC and ZPS) focuses on the conservation of specific species and habitats of Community interest. It is, however, interesting to determine whether this investment in the conservation and management of natural environments also benefits biodiversity more broadly. The general question is therefore: Is there a collateral "Natura 2000" benefit for a larger species community than the species covered by the two Directives?
This involves assessing whether the composition of communities (presence and abundance of species) differs between Natura 2000 sites and sites without protection status "all other things being equal". The study should seek to identify and distinguish between a "designation" effect (the characteristic comes from a different initial state between the network and the rest of the territory) and a "management" effect, i.e. how bird assemblages within the Natura 2000 network change over time compared to the rest of the territory.
To evaluate an effect of the management of Natura 2000 sites, comparable data must be available in and outside managed sites. The French Breeding Bird Survey data (Vigie Nature STOC) offer this perspective and work has already been done on this topic in the past (see Pellissier et al., 2013 and 2014, Devictor et al., 2007). The aim here is to update these analyzes with longer series of data (+ 6 years of data compared to the previous study) and to explore more deeply certain aspects, especially the measurement of a possible "management effect” over time…
